README.md, before:

# MIRAGE

[Quantum Circuit Decomposition and Routing Collaborative Design using Mirror Gates](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.03874)

[![ecosystem](https://img.shields.io/badge/Qiskit-Ecosystem-blueviolet)](https://github.com/qiskit-community/ecosystem)
![Tests](https://github.com/Pitt-JonesLab/mirror-gates/actions/workflows/tests.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)
![Format Check](https://github.com/Pitt-JonesLab/mirror-gates/actions/workflows/format-check.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)
<a href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/Pitt-JonesLab/mirror-gates/blob/main/mirage_demo.ipynb" target="_parent"><img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/></a>

## 📌 Project Overview

- **Objective**: Optimize quantum transpilation by unifying the layout and routing stages with gate decomposition.
- **Strategy**: Employ the mirror gate of $\texttt{U}$, represented as $\texttt{U} \cdot \texttt{SWAP}$, to achieve more cost-efficient routing without altering decomposition costs. In certain cases, it can even reduce decomposition expenses.

## 🌟 Key Features

- **Mirage Algorithm**: Defined in `src/mirror_gates/mirage.py`

![image](https://github.com/Pitt-JonesLab/mirror-gates/assets/47376937/08408089-561a-4799-9904-a2637d829edd)

## 📊 Results & Comparisons

- **Experiments**: Detailed in `src/notebooks/results`
- **Findings**: Our methodology considerably reduces circuit depth and swap count when compared with conventional techniques across multiple topologies.

![image](https://github.com/Pitt-JonesLab/mirror-gates/assets/47376937/81653cab-24c1-4170-ac5a-438c94d2bab3)

## 🚀 Getting Started

To use as a standalone [transpiler plugin](https://qiskit.org/documentation/apidoc/transpiler_plugins.html), install using

```
pip install -e git+https://github.com/Pitt-JonesLab/mirror-gates#egg=mirror-gates[core]
```

Then get started by exploring the main demo located at `src/mirror_gates/notebooks/bench.ipynb`.

### 💻🐒 Usage

```python
from qiskit.transpiler import CouplingMap
coupling_map = CouplingMap.from_grid(6, 6)
```

#### 1. Use as a Qiskit-Plugin

Integrate MIRAGE into your existing transpilation pipeline:

```python
from qiskit import transpile
mirage_qc = transpile(
              qc, # input circuit
              optimization_level = 3, # default: Qiskit's highest level
              coupling_map=coupling_map,
              basis_gates= ["u", "xx_plus_yy", "id"],
              routing_method="mirage",
              layout_method="sabre_layout_v2",
)
```

#### 2. Use Mirage as a complete pass manager.

Handles all pre-, post-processing stages described in our paper:

```python
from mirror_gates.pass_managers import Mirage
mirage = Mirage(
            coupling_map, # coupling map
            name="Mirage-$\sqrt{\texttt{iSWAP}}$", # transpile_benchy and figure labels)
            parallel=True, # run trials in parallel or serial
            cx_basis=False, # turning on sets CNOT as the basis gate,
            # (can take arbitrary basis but parameters are not configured that way yet)
            cost_function="depth", # switch to "basic" for counting SWAPs
            fixed_aggression=None, # force aggression level on all iterations
            layout_trials=None, # how many independent layout trials to run (20)
            fb_iters=None, # how many forward-backward iterations to run (4)
            swap_trials=None, # how many independent routing trials to run (20)
            no_vf2=False, # keep False to use VF2 for finding complete layouts
            logger=None, # from logging moduel
)
mirage_qc = mirage.run(circuit=qc)
```

> [!WARNING]
> Neither method currently includes an optimized [decomposition pass](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/9375). Previously I've [implemented the logic](https://github.com/Pitt-JonesLab/slam_decomposition/blob/main/src/slam/utils/transpiler_pass/weyl_decompose.py), but this PR suggests there were some bugs in the referenced paper- so I'll wait until that gets merged. When including "xx_plus_yy", you'll see some gates are decomposed into 4 basis gates due to limitations of the built-in decomposition method, but using the more updated decomposer (or looking up circuit-depth with monodromy) will see this won't ever exceed $k=3$.

### 📋 Prerequisites

- **Monodromy Dependency**: This needs lrs. To install:

  - `sudo apt install lrslib`

- **Package Dependencies**: By default, two other packages are dependencies:

  - [transpile_benchy](https://github.com/evmckinney9/transpile_benchy): Manages circuit benchmarks, data analytics, and plotting.
  - [monodromy (fork)](https://github.com/evmckinney9/monodromy): modified for Qiskit AnalysisPass integration.

- ⚠️ **Setup**: Running `make init` sets up the required environment and tools. It also clones required repositories.
  - **Optional**: If you want to leverage the additional features from transpile_benchy, especially its submodules for circuit benchmarking, run `make dev-init`. This will clone and set up transpile_benchy with its complete functionalities.

### Dive Deeper into the Code 💻🐒

- **Please report any issues**. (Currently the most unstable part is related to the parallel processing. 😺)
- The main logic of the MIRAGE pass is in `src/mirror_gates/mirage.py` which includes `ParallelMirage`, and the class `Mirage`, a subclass of `qiskit.transpiler.passes.SabreSwap` to handle serial passes.
- The main pass manager is defined in `src/mirror_gates/pass_managers.py`.
- Circuit benchmarks are defined as `.txt` files in `src/mirror_gates/circuits/`. These are loaded into a `transpile_benchy.Library` object.
- For more details, see code documentation or contact me.

Additional utility commands available in the Makefile:

- **make format**: Formats the codebase.
- **make clean**: Cleans up temporary and unnecessary files.
- **make test**: Runs tests to ensure code functionality.
- For more information about the repository structure, visit my [python-template](https://github.com/evmckinney9/python-template).

## 📚 Reference

```bibtex
@article{McKinney_MIRAGE_Quantum_Circuit_2023,
    author = {McKinney, Evan and Hatridge, Michael and Jones, Alex K},
    doi = {10.48550/arXiv.2308.03874},
    journal = {arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03874},
    title = {{MIRAGE: Quantum Circuit Decomposition and Routing Collaborative Design using Mirror Gates}},
    year = {2023}
}
```

Commit message:

Noisy simulation (#15)
* removes mqt bench dependencies  to incorporate sqiswap decomp branch

* working sqiswap decomposition pass

* dev: questionabley working noisy simulation fidelity calculations

* dev: move fidelity simulation functionality from notebook to module

* dev: fidelity vs duration for randomly generated circuits

* refactor: ipynb naming conventions

* result: noisy fredkin gate

* questionably working simulation

* feat: noisy fidelity metric and results

* data: rerun with new t1,t2

* fix: appropriate fidelity scaling using depolarizing error channel

* data: fidelity as function of duration

* data: absolute fidelity changes figure

README.md, after:

# MIRAGE

[Quantum Circuit Decomposition and Routing Collaborative Design using Mirror Gates](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.03874)

[![ecosystem](https://img.shields.io/badge/Qiskit-Ecosystem-blueviolet)](https://github.com/qiskit-community/ecosystem)
![Tests](https://github.com/Pitt-JonesLab/mirror-gates/actions/workflows/tests.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)
![Format Check](https://github.com/Pitt-JonesLab/mirror-gates/actions/workflows/format-check.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)
<a href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/Pitt-JonesLab/mirror-gates/blob/main/mirage_demo.ipynb" target="_parent"><img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/></a>

## 📌 Project Overview

- **Objective**: Optimize quantum transpilation by unifying the layout and routing stages with gate decomposition.
- **Strategy**: Employ the mirror gate of $\texttt{U}$, represented as $\texttt{U} \cdot \texttt{SWAP}$, to achieve more cost-efficient routing without altering decomposition costs. In certain cases, it can even reduce decomposition expenses.

## 🌟 Key Features

- **Mirage Algorithm**: Defined in `src/mirror_gates/mirage.py`

![image](https://github.com/Pitt-JonesLab/mirror-gates/assets/47376937/08408089-561a-4799-9904-a2637d829edd)

## 📊 Results & Comparisons

- **Experiments**: Detailed in `src/notebooks/results`
- **Findings**: Our methodology considerably reduces circuit depth and swap count when compared with conventional techniques across multiple topologies.

![image](https://github.com/Pitt-JonesLab/mirror-gates/assets/47376937/81653cab-24c1-4170-ac5a-438c94d2bab3)

## 🚀 Getting Started

To use as a standalone [transpiler plugin](https://qiskit.org/documentation/apidoc/transpiler_plugins.html), install using

```
pip install -e git+https://github.com/Pitt-JonesLab/mirror-gates#egg=mirror-gates[core]
```

Then get started by exploring the main demo located at `src/mirror_gates/notebooks/bench.ipynb`.

### 💻🐒 Usage

```python
from qiskit.transpiler import CouplingMap
coupling_map = CouplingMap.from_grid(6, 6)
```

#### 1. Use as a Qiskit-Plugin

Integrate MIRAGE into your existing transpilation pipeline:

```python
from qiskit import transpile
mirage_qc = transpile(
              qc, # input circuit
              optimization_level = 3, # default: Qiskit's highest level
              coupling_map=coupling_map,
              basis_gates= ["u", "xx_plus_yy", "id"],
              routing_method="mirage",
              layout_method="sabre_layout_v2",
)
```

#### 2. Use Mirage as a complete pass manager.

Handles all pre-, post-processing stages described in our paper:

```python
from mirror_gates.pass_managers import Mirage
mirage = Mirage(
            coupling_map, # coupling map
            name="Mirage-$\sqrt{\texttt{iSWAP}}$", # transpile_benchy and figure labels)
            parallel=True, # run trials in parallel or serial
            cx_basis=False, # turning on sets CNOT as the basis gate,
            # (can take arbitrary basis but parameters are not configured that way yet)
            cost_function="depth", # switch to "basic" for counting SWAPs
            fixed_aggression=None, # force aggression level on all iterations
            layout_trials=None, # how many independent layout trials to run (20)
            fb_iters=None, # how many forward-backward iterations to run (4)
            swap_trials=None, # how many independent routing trials to run (20)
            no_vf2=False, # keep False to use VF2 for finding complete layouts
            logger=None, # from logging moduel
)
mirage_qc = mirage.run(circuit=qc)
```

[!WARNING]
[!WARNING]
In the current version of Qiskit, there's no direct support for \( \sqrt{iSWAP} \) as a basis gate. As a workaround, I've been using `XX+YY`, which provides a partial solution but isn't fully optimized.

However, there's an ongoing [pull request](https://github.com/Qiskit/qiskit-terra/pull/9375) in Qiskit that introduces a new gate, `SiSwapGate`, which represents \( \sqrt{iSWAP} \). This PR also brings in optimized decomposition methods for the gate. I've previously [implemented a similar logic](https://github.com/Pitt-JonesLab/slam_decomposition/blob/main/src/slam/utils/transpiler_pass/weyl_decompose.py), but the PR suggests there might have been some inaccuracies in the paper I referenced.

To benefit from the advancements in the PR, I'm temporarily using a [fork of the PR](https://github.com/evmckinney9/qiskit-evmckinney9/tree/sqisw-gate) in this project. By leveraging the fork, when you use the `SiSwapGate`, you'll notice a more efficient decomposition compared to the `XX+YY` workaround.

Please note that this is a provisional solution. I'll transition back to the main Qiskit repository once the PR is merged and the `SiSwapGate` with its decomposition methods becomes officially available.

### 📋 Prerequisites

- **Monodromy Dependency**: This needs lrs. To install:

  - `sudo apt install lrslib`

- **Package Dependencies**: By default, two other packages are dependencies:

  - [transpile_benchy](https://github.com/evmckinney9/transpile_benchy): Manages circuit benchmarks, data analytics, and plotting.
  - [monodromy (fork)](https://github.com/evmckinney9/monodromy): modified for Qiskit AnalysisPass integration.

- ⚠️ **Setup**: Running `make init` sets up the required environment and tools. It also clones required repositories.
  - **Optional**: If you want to leverage the additional features from transpile_benchy, especially its submodules for circuit benchmarking, run `make dev-init`. This will clone and set up transpile_benchy with its complete functionalities.

### Dive Deeper into the Code 💻🐒

- **Please report any issues**. (Currently the most unstable part is related to the parallel processing. 😺)
- The main logic of the MIRAGE pass is in `src/mirror_gates/mirage.py` which includes `ParallelMirage`, and the class `Mirage`, a subclass of `qiskit.transpiler.passes.SabreSwap` to handle serial passes.
- The main pass manager is defined in `src/mirror_gates/pass_managers.py`.
- Circuit benchmarks are defined as `.txt` files in `src/mirror_gates/circuits/`. These are loaded into a `transpile_benchy.Library` object.
- For more details, see code documentation or contact me.

Additional utility commands available in the Makefile:

- **make format**: Formats the codebase.
- **make clean**: Cleans up temporary and unnecessary files.
- **make test**: Runs tests to ensure code functionality.
- For more information about the repository structure, visit my [python-template](https://github.com/evmckinney9/python-template).

## 📚 Reference

```bibtex
@article{McKinney_MIRAGE_Quantum_Circuit_2023,
    author = {McKinney, Evan and Hatridge, Michael and Jones, Alex K},
    doi = {10.48550/arXiv.2308.03874},
    journal = {arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03874},
    title = {{MIRAGE: Quantum Circuit Decomposition and Routing Collaborative Design using Mirror Gates}},
    year = {2023}
}
```
